Welcome to the first Data Science Hangout of 2023. Hope you're all having a great week.
But if we haven't had a chance to meet yet, thanks for joining us. I'm Rachel. It's nice
to meet you. This is an open space for the whole data science community to connect and
chat about data science leadership, questions you're facing, and getting to learn about
what's going on in the world of data across different industries. So each week we feature
a different data science leader as my co-host to help lead the discussion and answer any
questions from you all. So together we're all dedicated to making this a welcoming environment
for everybody. So I love when we can hear from everyone, no matter your level of experience
or area of work. And if you've been here before, you've heard this feel a lot, but there's
always three ways you can ask questions, but also provide your perspective. So you can
jump in by raising your hand here on Zoom. You could put questions into the Zoom chat.
And feel free to just put a little star next to it if you wanted me to read it from the
Zoom chat instead. Otherwise, I could call on you to introduce yourself and add some
context. But we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions anonymously. And so
I see Tyler and Hannah, thank you, both just shared that in the chat. But we share the
recordings of each session up to the Posit YouTube, so you can always go back and find
helpful resources and see an overview of each week. And we also have a LinkedIn group for
the Hangout, too, which I'll share in the chat here in just a second. One other note
I wanted to add here in the beginning, too, is if anybody is hiring right now and wants
to share that in the chat, feel free to put the link to the job descriptions there. I
was going to share a link in a little bit later for Chase Carpenter, who is one of our
featured leaders from the Chicago Cubs. They're hiring an assistant director of database marketing.
For our first Hangout of 2023, I am very excited to have Justin Alsaz here joining us. Justin
is Chief Data Officer for the City of Baltimore. And Justin, I love to have you introduce
yourself and probably fix where I messed up on pronouncing your last name and share a
little bit about your role and maybe something you like to do in your free time, too.
Sure. Cool. Thanks for the invite, Rachel. I know we originally planned on November,
so I didn't intend or I don't know if I deserve to be the first of the new year, but here
we are. Yeah, so my name is Justin Alsaz. You pronounced it fine. Just pretend the Z's
aren't there. So my role is Chief Data Officer for the City of Baltimore. I've been with
the city for a little over five years now. I started off as the data scientist for our
innovation team. So about five years ago, we were given a grant from Bloomberg Philanthropies
to create one of their innovation teams. I think there's about 25 or 30 cities with these
innovation team grants now. So from there, I spent about, I want to say, two years in
that role. We then merged our innovation team with CitySTAT, our performance management
team, and added a third program, our data fellows program. And I became the Deputy Director
for what we call the Office of Performance and Innovation. Spent about a year and a half
in that role. And up until then, our Chief Data Officer position had been in our IT agency,
so Baltimore City Information Technology, reporting for our CIO. About two years ago,
when we got a new administration, Mayor Brandon Scott came in. We also added a new position
called the City Administrator, which is kind of like a Chief Operating Officer for the city.
The decision was made to move the Chief Data Officer role out of our IT agency and to report
to our City Administrator. So it definitely kind of raised the profile of data within the
administration, provided kind of executive leadership support around data and how to use
it more strategically. And so when the role was moved over to the Mayor's office, that's when
I took the role. So yeah, coming up on two years in that role, that's just incredible.
So over the last two years, part of the rationale for moving it into the Mayor's office was to put
a little bit more emphasis, obviously on strategy and how to use data and analytics quite a bit more
strategically than we had been, but also data governance. So we recognized data quality
continues to be an issue. There are constantly questions, and this is true of any city government
or any jurisdiction really, around when you can and can't share data. What are the best uses?
What uses should we not pursue of data? So data governance is also kind of one of those large
buckets that I'm responsible for. So that's a little bit about me and the role here in city
government. We just a few months ago announced we'd be using ARPA funding. So ARPA is American
Rescue Plan Act. This is federal funding in response to COVID. Baltimore received about
$640 million in ARPA funding, and we're using $2 million of that to create a digital services team.
So that will be in my office. We've been recruiting. Our director of digital services,
city's first director of digital services, just started on Monday. Their name is Shelby Switzer.
They came from the Beck Center and from U.S. Digital Services. So really excited to have
them on board. I posted a link in the chat. We are still hiring for a couple of roles,
lead developer and lead UX designer in particular. So if you're interested or know folks,
please reach out, apply. And I can also talk a little bit about maybe some anticipated new roles
later this year that would be in my office. Fingers crossed. But we can get to that as it
comes up. So yeah, that's kind of a quick intro. Happy to take questions or yeah, however you all
want to roll. Yeah. Awesome. And what about something you like to do in your free time too?
Free time. I've got two kids. One is going to be five on Saturday and the other one's
two and a half and he's just leaning really hard into that terrible two mode,
just really growing into it. So it's pandemic has been fun for raising kids. A lot of fun.
So that's mostly my free time. I read a lot and I'm into road cycling quite a bit, but
you know, it's mostly the kids these days. That's great. Happy birthday to them.
Well, we're waiting for some questions to come in from everybody. It sounds like there's a lot
of change across the organization and a lot of new data roles. And I was curious how you're going
about building data literacy through city government. Yeah, that's a great question.
It has grown by leaps and bounds, even just in the five years since I've been here.
There were a few things that I've been kind of either pursuing,
and then more generally how it's kind of gone for the city. So similar to this group, Rachel,
like one of the first things I did when I came into city government was kind of stealing from
my old, my previous job was, so I came into the mayor's office as a data scientist, but I didn't
know who were all the data people in all the different agencies. So created a, we called it
the data center for excellence, which was basically just a once a month, you know, basically hangout.
Someone might present some of the work that they're involved in, or, you know, maybe a new tool
they're trying out, issues they're having. So that was one of the first communities of practice we
kind of established around data and city government, and that was meant to, again, kind of
connect the data people. There are a couple of things, so that was a few years ago. There have
been a few other, like we have a women in data group now kind of forming a community of practice
and a safe space for women and minorities in the data. Most recently, though, it's been more of a
concerted effort, especially as I've taken on the role of chief data officer. There are a couple of
places. One is launching a data academy. So we have been piloting it maybe for the last two months
with the Center for Government Excellence. This is another Bloomberg funded group, but they're
at Johns Hopkins, literally right around the corner from me. And yeah, so we've been developing
a curriculum for the data academy. Where we've chosen to focus is, it'd be very easy to start
creating some kind of curriculum that's for data analysts and data scientists, right? Like,
here are the tools we use in city government, you know, here's like intermediate to advanced power BI
or, you know, whatever the case might be. But instead, where we chose to focus was on folks
with little or no data literacy. So think about like your frontline workers, your solid waste
collection crews, your housing inspector, like those folks. And so we've named a few different
tracks within the academy that we're working on. But the first one that we've really given a lot
of focus is this kind of foundations of data literacy, which is really just about, you know,
what are data? How does it show up in your life? How does it show up in your work?
So trying to start at kind of, you know, the very foundational level so we can make sure we're
bringing everyone along and growing data literacy. Another area that's, and so we're actually right
in the middle of trying to consolidate a lot of these disparate efforts around data literacy
into a more comprehensive workforce strategy. Another component is around our job classifications.
So in government, there's always, you know, your job, your functional job title might be data
scientist. But for us, we still have actual classifications that are more like operations
manager or operations officer. We are working with our IT department to modernize a lot of
tech and data related classifications so that we can then work with our agencies so that they know
better what they're actually looking for. I know it's similar in the industry where if the
organization is relatively new to data scientists, they think they need a data scientist first.
And so they hire a data scientist, but that person might quickly get burned out because what they
really end up doing is entirely data cleaning or creating a better data collection tool in the
first place, which was kind of my, if I'm honest, that was what my role was like when I initially
came in. So getting agencies to see that there's a whole, like, universe of data roles and trying to
fit the best, you know, the best one to their needs. So that's another area where there's a lot
about a lot of talk and a lot of work going into growing kind of data literacy within government.
Thank you. I see a lot of chat going on back and forth and great resources being shared too.
Catherine, I know you had a question earlier in the chat. Do you want to jump in?
Hey, I was just bringing up, I mean, you said you were working with some people at Johns Hopkins
at the last RStudio conference, that organization data trail that presented kind of focusing on
many of the things that you were speaking to, you know, different job classifications and things
like that, not focused within government, but just that it is really kind of an industry-wide
problem going from their focus for interns all the way up through any position. So I was just
kind of sharing that with you. And I think somebody else included the link to the talk
that there's really a lot of opportunity there for partnership, but even, you know, in your own
neighborhood. Yeah, it's funny you mentioned them. So I haven't talked to Jeff in a while. So Jeff and
I actually met, gosh, this would have been maybe three or so years ago. I don't think it had been
called data trail at the time, but it was a similar, I think it might've been the same or
similar program. They were looking to train. Yeah, I think they went through a rebrand.
Yeah, yeah. Training, yeah, really high school and college students from East Baltimore and
data science. We actually did hire one on for an intern. I think it might've been an internship
about three years ago. Yeah, it's a great idea. In fact, I think the person we had hired had
started in on college. They were pursuing, they had started pursuing a degree in, I want to say
it was music or music or recording, sound recording, decided that wasn't for them. Wasn't
sure what was next and found out about this program and said, yeah, this is actually something
I'm really interested in. And so, yeah, they spent some time with us. And the really cool thing is he
also created a small consulting firm. They were called Problem Forward. I think they're still
around, but for those folks who don't, who go through that program, but don't find an immediate
role elsewhere, Problem Forward was spun up as a small consulting firm that would hire
the people that they've trained in that program. And it was a consulting firm, so they would just
take on small projects with local businesses. So it was a really cool model. Yeah, we've definitely
worked with them in the past. I haven't recently, but yeah, it's a great reminder that, yeah, some
of, you know, this is obviously a national and international community around data science,
but there's even like hyper local, you know, networks of data science going on too.
Thank you. I'm seeing a few plus ones to Alan's question from earlier. And Alan,
I'd love to have you jump in next with your question.
Sure. Hey, Justin, hi, everybody. I'm really curious, maybe, Justin, if you could sort of
blow up super high level and talk about, like, what's the mission of the office that you're in,
and how does that relate to who your customers are? Are those residents of the city? Are the
agencies and employees? You know, what are the things you're doing look like, and how does that
roll out to all of those people? Like, just to give context. And then Raha's got a great question,
digging more into detail about, like, real specific stuff. And I think, like her, like,
I've got tons of questions about, like, you know, doing data at a city level and what that's like.
So some of that high level context would be great. Thanks.
Sure. Yeah. Yeah. So maybe step back maybe a little bit, like, at the organizational structure.
So like I said, I report directly to the city administrator who is appointed by our mayor.
So I'm in the mayor's cabinet. There's also, but because the role was just moved over less
than two years ago, it didn't come with any other roles. So until we've now started hiring
for the digital services team, I've been in office of one as the chief data officer.
The office that I came from, the mayor's office of performance and innovation,
like I mentioned, they have our performance management shop,
CityStat. So they're looking at kind of broad KPIs more as a way of either identifying issues
or holding agencies accountable for performance. There's, and then the Data Fellows Program,
which is another effort we made a couple of years ago. We created that program to hire in kind of
entry level data folks to get them in the door to city government and then deploy them
to agencies that needed help. And then our innovation team.
So, and then of course, there's our IT agency, BCIT. There are, in any given agency, there are
other data analysts working with, who become kind of subject matter experts in their areas,
their domains. My role, it's a little bit of both, right? And I'm hoping to be able to
kind of like 50-50. So right now, me personally being responsible for things like data governance
and capacity building, those are both things that are a little bit inward focused. However,
with building the digital services team, that is about building better customer service
and better digital experiences for residents. So that would be my role.
I mentioned 50-50, because by the end of the year, hopefully in this new budget year,
we'll be creating a more proper data science team in my office. So that's kind of where we're at.
So that's where we're at right now. And then we're also going to be creating a more
robust data science team in my office. So that's kind of where we're at right now.
So that's kind of where we're at right now. So that's kind of where we're at right now.
A more proper data science team in my office. So like I mentioned, our city stat team really
wrestles with more high-level KPIs and performance at kind of a higher level.
I think they've always wanted to dive more deeply into data, but a lot of the performance stuff
happens on certain cycles. So like police stat is a meeting that happens every two weeks.
You can't like deliver deep insight or create new tools on a two-week cycle. Same with clean
stat, which is about cleaning the city. So what I proposed is creating a small
analytic shop under my office that, whereas our digital services team would be about improving
resident-facing services. And part of this is just a way of making the case that it's
cost-effective, but the analytic shop, I'm imagining being more about efficiency and
more internally focused. So helping agencies find, you know, maybe it's detecting fraud,
maybe it's optimizing routes for snow plows, that kind of thing. So we have that expertise
in a few different spots, but because it's so sporadic, those folks are often pulled
into just day-to-day operations or just the regular reporting. And we still don't,
even though we would like to, we just don't have the capacity to set aside and say,
take this problem and run with it for a month and come back to us and see what you've got.
So that's what I'm looking to build. And hopefully we'll be hiring for three or four roles for that
by the end of the year. Cool. Does that answer your question? Yeah, it does. It gave me a good
sense for kind of where you are. And I think that that vision of what does a team look like that can
do more and have like sort of room to run a little bit sounds really exciting. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm
excited too, because that's what, I mean, that's a little bit of what I had done previously. And so,
and that's what I always imagined data analytics in the city looking like, and it definitely does
in other places. So it's a little bit of getting us up to speed. Now that said, like there are
going to be the opportunities to do that kind of thing are much more rare than performance
management or just simple data analysis. Because again, it's finding the right combination of high
enough data quality and an agency who their leadership and their operations will be able to
kind of adapt and use that kind of analysis or tools because leadership, it's on a spectrum,
not every agency, you know, not every, not all of their heads are ready to like,
you know, use kind of the next, next generation of tools to optimize our resources better. So
yeah, there'll be, but that said there are those use cases out there. And I've got a couple of
examples I'm happy to share that we've worked on already, but yeah, that's, that's what I'm
looking forward to this year. Cool. Thank you. Yep. Thank you. Really interested in that
snowplow optimization example, NC Libby. Other cities, other cities, especially places like
Rochester, you know, a lot of Northern cities have, have wrestled with that for sure.
We're, Baltimore is one of those cities where like we get a dusting of snow and the whole city
shuts down because it happens so infrequently that we don't, we can't build up that amount of
capacity to deal with it for the, like the rare times we get lots of snow, but places like
Rochester where it's like day in and day out for six months. Yeah. They've, they've definitely
worked on those routes. I see a few anonymous questions that came through and I want to make
sure I get to those too. And one was what about hardware and cloud infrastructure? Do you have
to deal with legacy systems? Does the new money allow you to upgrade? Yeah, good question. Yes,
about legacy systems. This year our IT department, so there's, there's, I, I have a little bit,
so chief data officer roles kind of like run the spectrum in terms of responsibilities and where
they are, where they're situated organizationally. I have a little bit less control over architecture.
That said, yes, there are tons of legacy applications and infrastructure to deal with.
This year we're targeting finally decommissioning our mainframe, which right now still runs
some of our environmental citations and some of our revenue collections and that kind of thing.
So we're looking to like replace that. There's also a legacy system with our housing department
that was homegrown by one person that housing department had hired who was there for 20 years,
wasn't well documented. They of course left and now, you know, we're kind of picking up the scraps
on that system and it does all of our code enforcement and a whole host of other housing,
housing department functions. So yeah, legacy systems continue to be a challenge. Luckily,
like we have an IT department that's kind of on it right now and, and has plans to, to,
to mitigate a lot of that. And so as those things get replaced, you know, we only have
up to go in terms of data quality. We just over the last two years have rolled out Workday as our
new ERP, enterprise resource planning system. That in and of itself, I think has addressed a
lot of finance and HR data quality issues. So yeah, we're, we're making moves in that direction.
Yes, there's legacy systems, but I challenge you all to find a chief data officer in another city
who doesn't reckon with that sometimes. And as far as cloud goes, yeah, we, so for one,
our GIS team is working hard on moving a lot, a lot of our GIS layers and infrastructure over to
cloud. Of course it's with Esri, as is our open Baltimore, our open data platform.
We're, I think it's, it's picking your battles and where you're going to get the most bang for
the buck at the moment for us. I'm looking to pilot a couple of tools to move to cloud. So
one that I'll mention is we over the summer partnered with a group at Carnegie Mellon
called the Data Science for Social Good. You may know this already, but Baltimore has like
a lot of vacant buildings. And when a building sits vacant for long enough, rooftops tend to
become an issue. And back in January of last year, we had three firefighters killed when a rooftop
was in a, it was a fully involved fire, rooftop collapsed on the three firefighters and were
killed. So we're using, we partnered with Carnegie Mellon to develop an AI tool that
will detect collapsed roofs based on our aerial flyover imagery. We'll, every year we get new
flyover imagery, which means every year we'll want to refine and update the model
and get new predictions so we can find any new buildings that might have rooftop issues.
But we need better, like we're not, I can't, we can't run that on someone's local machine.
So that's a good opportunity to start pushing the bounds of what we can do in cloud.
So that's, that's one, yeah, we're looking for a couple of places to definitely move that way.
Thank you for that example. And I'm seeing quite a few questions come into the Zoom
chat now too. And I think Mike, you may be asked first, so I'll hand it over to you first.
Hi there. So I was, this is a, I guess a topical question for first session in January,
it's goal setting season. So how, how do you balance, you know, it's a newish team. So how
do you balance goals about, you know, setting up your shop and making, you know, your infrastructure
great and easy to work with and the goals that are kind of, I guess the, the kind of higher up
or your customers or your key stakeholders, the things they want, because I'm right in
the middle of that dilemma and it's, it's tricky, right? Yeah, yeah, for sure.
One is, I mean, if everything's a priority, nothing is a priority, but at least having
enough of a mix that some things are, some things are for you, some things are for others.
I'm kind of looking at some of my own, you know, like I said, so up until now I've been in office
of one, so it's, it's in some ways, these are like the office OKRs and some ways they're like
personal OKRs because I'm just one person, you know, but yeah, I mean, so in terms of the digital
services team and onboarding and getting that just stood up, like, we're lucky enough that,
you know, the mayor and city administrator needed to sign off on that, that spending
because it's ARPA funding. And so, and not only that, but like, you know, all aware of kind of,
one, hiring challenges right now in the market, but two, just hiring process in terms of city
functions. And so they rightly recognize that actually getting that team stood up, hiring
people is a win. It may not like have built you, you know, a new service for a resident or fixed
anything yet, but that is a win. And I think we're lucky enough that our mayor like recognizes that.
So we have kind of executive leadership that recognizes, that is willing to like kind of
celebrate some of the smaller, more inward focused wins. And then, yeah, like there's a
pretty, and honestly, for some of them, there is a pretty direct, even though it sounds ostensibly
about, you know, internal capacity or being inward focused, there's a pretty direct line and theory
of change from if we improve data literacy by building this data academy program, we will
improve service delivery to our residents. Or if we create this digital services team and even
getting, you know, a handful of new experts in civic technology, and we will build better services
for residents. So now that's, I'm lucky enough, again, being in kind of the public sector space
where, you know, it's, if you can't draw that line, chances are you aren't doing that thing in
the first place, or you're not setting that goal in the first place, you know. So I don't know if
that helps or answers the question, but a couple of initial thoughts on it, I guess.
Awesome. Raha, I see you had asked a question in the chat as well. Would you want to jump in next?
Sure, good timing. I just ran down to make sure my Amazon package wasn't stolen.
Oh, I'm glad that it wasn't.
No, I got there in time. No, so I live in Baltimore too, and there's definitely a lot
of issues here that I'm concerned about that I feel data could really address. But part of that
is making sure that you're able to collect the right data, that you're able to do analysis on
it, and that someone listens to that and makes a decision. So I wanted to see if you had any
examples of where that has been done or where you see it heading. Like, will 311 be better?
Will street sweeping be better? Can you make sure certain neighborhoods aren't underserved?
Yep, yep, it's a great question.
Maybe a couple of different scales I can offer. So one about, well, this would have been just
before the pandemic, so I cannot believe it's been three years. So we identified a pretty big
backlog in DPW in terms of cleaning service requests in the city. This was upwards of,
I want to say there were 15 or 17,000 service requests. That was a backlog. So these are things
that had accumulated. It was right in the middle of the summer. So a couple of things happened.
One was we worked with DPW basically to even identify that as an issue and start discussing
how we were going to deal with it. And part of that was actually, we collected a few parameters
from them. And this is more of like an engineering approach as opposed to a data science approach,
but we built a small kind of heuristic model where you could modify kind of the number of
crews that were online and some of the distribution of where the SRs were and that kind of thing
to try and estimate how quickly we could drive things down. And so you can manipulate how many
crews you have where in the city and you could see whether we might or might not get to clearing
out the backlog and when. Because I think we had set a particular goal of getting that eliminated
by a certain date. Yeah, I can't remember the exact timing. So one was, and that was a bit of a
process of convincing that, yeah, you can ask for their parameters and plug it into your little
model, but all they have to do is say, I don't know how this model works or I don't believe
your model to like not want to drive their decisions. They're not going to listen to it. So
it was a very simplistic model that they could, you know, you took them along each step and say,
okay, if you've got this many crews here, that means you could complete how many SRs, you know,
that day. The other half of that one was they used to divide the city up into quadrants and they had
hard restrictions on how many crews they would put in each quadrant, which meant if a quadrant,
if a crew called off in a quadrant, it impacted that quadrant, but no one else. But the issue was
if all the SRs, if all the demand was in another part of the city or in that part of the city,
you couldn't pull a crew from elsewhere that had a low workload into that area. So it was,
they were placing arbitrary constraints on their deployments. We got them basically to eliminate
that way of working, that kind of strategy, because we proved out that you're exacerbating
the issue by, you know, arbitrarily placing these constraints on your crews. So that was a really
good win. And by the way, I think there was a Sun article at the time about it. The southeast
quadrant of the city was getting far better service than the rest of the city. So there was
a massive equity issue. So again, just by some simple analysis and showing them and bringing
them along, we were able to make, you know, convince them to make some better decisions.
The most recent example of getting folks to make decisions was, so DPW is one of those where it's
a little bit tougher to, they're a little bit further behind, I would say, on their growth
curves in terms of data literacy and using data to make decisions. At the other end-
They're losing their leadership.
What's that?
They're also losing their leadership. The head of DPW resigned.
Yeah, just a couple of days ago. Yeah, it was like two days ago, right?
But did they even collect the right data in the first place? Is it available? Because I know
what you were talking about the cleanup crews, I think we have 16 total, which is nowhere near
enough. And so there's something that they need. I don't, I mean, it's, you don't make hiring
decisions, obviously. There's some gap of how they recruit and where they get people to do what,
I mean, DPW especially with solid waste. But across the board, are people collecting the
right type of data that allows you to do the analysis to make decisions? Or do you then
request them to make, to collect that data? How do you do that?
In a lot of the, I mean, there's kind of the diminishing returns, right? Like, so 311 definitely
covers a lot of our city services and certainly for something like public works, you know,
311 is meant to be the record of, you know, the source of truth. And so, yeah, we direct
residents to 311. That's what we look at internally to determine service levels.
And now that said, we continue to have kind of quality issues around 311, like you raised that,
you know, for example, there's still the concern that something gets closed, but the work wasn't
performed. That issue, like, it's completely dependent on what SR type you're looking at,
because there's 200 service request types and each of them is an entirely different
workflow. It's a different crew. It's different people involved. So anyways, all that to say,
like, I would say on the whole, we're collecting the right data for some of the bigger areas.
I think there are some smaller areas where we definitely need better data. One that comes to
mind is, it's related to illegal dumping, but our transfer stations, you know, where a small hauler
truck could go and drop off their loads, you know, maybe they're cleaning up debris from, you know,
a construction site or something. So all they do is, you know, they've got a pickup truck and they
run a truckload of debris. We have really long line waits at those drop-off stations.
And we've always had the, we've always hypothesized that because there are those long
waits and these guys are just trying to make money, that if they see a long wait, they're
going to leave and go dump their load somewhere they shouldn't be dumping it. And so that
exacerbates illegal dumping issues. The problem is we don't have either a digital
licensing or check-in process for the transfer stations. So we can't actually monitor, you know,
if you have a small hauler license, how often are you actually checking in at the transfer station?
Because if we see that you have an active small hauler license, but you're never checking in
to a transfer station, that might be a signal that they're taking their loads elsewhere.
But because we don't have any kind of digital tools for doing that check-in process, we aren't
able to look at that issue all that closely. So there are definitely pockets where we absolutely
need better data. And again, it's always a matter of cities or resource straps, you know, picking,
and like you said, there's a spectrum of kind of leadership in terms of being data driven. So
it's finding the areas where you've got all the right constraints satisfied to do some good.
Sorry, I feel like that was a long answer.
No, that's great. It's really interesting to be able to like dive deep into one of these
like data problems and see all the different sides of it. And I know there are quite a few
questions here, so I want to jump over to a few others. But Eric, I see you had asked a question
in the chat a bit ago. Do you want to jump in? Sure. It's been fascinating to hear your stories,
Justin, and really exciting to hear these perspectives. So I'm just kind of curious
as somebody who really appreciates, you know, the tool stack and how we're taking modern approaches
to data science, what kind of modern tooling are you trying to implement across your workflows,
especially in the, you know, the government sector where, of course, my collaboration mostly
with colleagues at the FDA, and I know they tend to have some strict requirements on what they're
allowed to use and whatnot. So just kind of curious how you're handling those approaches for like
best practice of co-development or releases within your team. Yeah, it's a joint effort with
our IT department because, you know, for the ransomware attack we had, so we had a ransomware
attack here three years ago, and a lot of cities have experienced these over the last couple of
years. It really ground city government completely to a halt. I couldn't access my email for more
than a month. Coming out of that, there's been a pretty strong emphasis not only on cybersecurity,
but even just modernizing and professionalizing our IT approach, and so our IT department has
grown by leaps and bounds in that regard. It's a joint effort because there's, this is one of
those spaces where there's a little bit of overlap between IT and the technology side, but also data
analytics and that side of things, and the data governance around it. So things like, we're just
now getting into like what exactly is our code repo policy. Internally, we have Azure, like the
IT department's using Azure DevOps now for code and deploying, and so getting our data analysts
onto that and getting them to recognize the value and bringing that into Azure is important because,
of course, on the data side and a lot of the civic technology side, you also want to
build open source tools, and like that's always my preference as well, but a lot of folks who either
come into data science from other areas, they aren't always up to speed on kind of software
development best practices, and so you do get folks, you know, writing code, maybe code that
doesn't need to be or doesn't belong on GitHub and really doesn't actually need to stay internally.
So that's something we're actually kind of confronting right now is let's get together a
policy where we all agree this is a great use case for open source. This is where you should make
something open source, and here are the places where we can't make it open source and need to
keep things internal. So there are definitely governance issues there. That's kind of a live
question for us. Yeah, did that answer your question? I can't recall.
No, that's quite interesting to me, and I can sympathize. In fact, I was on a meeting just before
this where my colleagues had never heard about GitHub in this upper part of the org, and yeah,
there's lots of education that we even have to do in our own organizations about some of these
tooling, but yeah, certainly sounds like you're thinking a lot of the great ideas, and I agree.
There definitely is a lot of overlap that can occur between what you're proposing from a
development, you know, tooling perspective and what IT is trying to serve up, so having that
relationship solid up front is always really beneficial. The other, and the other
really big aspect of it for city government or any government really is that
we're an organization of organizations. So in some respects, yes, we have central IT
who can support all of the other agencies. Up until the last couple of years, a lot of agencies
pursued their own IT, you know, whether they weren't getting good support from central IT or
weren't moving quickly enough or want to try their own things or wanted to use something different
than everyone else was using. So there's been a lot of, like, so there's been a federated approach
very distributed, and so, and that applied to the data folks as well. So
there's an argument to be made that there are things we need to centralize, and
what were constraints around? The concern is always, well, we don't want to slow down an agency.
If they've got someone who knows how to use data over there, we want them to, and the agency
knows what they want to do with it. We don't want to be a bottleneck, and we don't want to
constrain them. We want to get them to use that data how they need to. So there's kind of a
balancing act there where, like, yes, we need to be a little bit more constrained and a little bit
more centralized with some things, but not at the cost of innovation, agency responsiveness,
you know, real problem solving that needs to get done. So it is a challenge when it's
not, in some respects, we're one organization, and in other respects, we're 30 organizations, so
that definitely complicates it. Rory, I see you shared an example of a citizen data science
analysis in Baltimore. I'd love to hear from you and have you ask your question, too. Yeah, sure.
Hey, Justin. I'm Rory. I live in Baltimore. I'm in Canton. A while ago, I don't know if you guys
have come across this yet, but on Reddit, there's a thread of someone scraping the water bill page
and taking a look at who has outstanding bills, and in general, the gist is that there's, I think
it's like $330 million in water bills that haven't been paid, a lot of them actually being, like,
business or corporate customers. I was curious, because right now, I work in people analytics,
and I'm working on building out a sort of active and passive listening strategy,
and so this is what's top of mind for me right now is, how are you guys sort of collecting
the needs of the city and deciding what projects the data team can get involved in and really help
solve some of those issues? So I would assume, you know, I've talked to a lot of people about this.
They've seen this Reddit thread before, and I'm sure it's made its way through traditional channels
to the government as far as working on the water bill. I'm sure you guys have some exposure to it,
but what I'm curious about is if you guys are working on any kind of listening strategy to
pull in from outside of traditional channels ways of detecting problems that are going on in the
city. Yeah, that's a good question. I think every team and I think every office or department or
agency or whatever has slightly different ways of doing that, and for, you know, once we actually
have a, you know, essential like analytics team as opposed to city stat or some of the other data
functions, I think like we'll, some of the criteria that of course come to mind are, you know, having
a project where you've got leadership buy-in so that if you dive into the problem and come up with
something that they're actually going to be responsive to it and know how to approach it.
As far as listening goes, there's, like I said, it depends on the area, but there are
a few different conduits. There's, you know, there's always going to be that issue
that the mayor cares about. There's always going to be issues that the city council cares about.
The mayor's office of constituent services who kind of deals directly with residents on things
that are like maybe not just a straightforward 311 request but are maybe more lengthier in-depth
issues. Agencies all have their own community liaisons and PIOs that are out in the community
and surfacing issues. For a data team, you know, like, yeah, and how a data team might choose based
on all of these different inputs and communication streams. Yeah, like I said, leadership, data
quality is another one. Is this an issue, is the problem at hand that we have data that might help
us address the problem and we just need to put some brain power behind it? Or is it, well, when
we actually dig into it, we don't have data at all or we don't have the right data or good enough
data. And so now what we actually need is to invest in a new platform or create a new 311
service request type or put these people in contact with constituent services. I don't think there's
any one cohesive strategy, like, community engagement is just messy. And by the way,
like, I don't want to speak for the administration, like, because, yeah, that's not always my
purview, but it's certainly like a huge aspect is, and I try to regularly do kind of listening
tours with the agencies themselves. So whether it's talking to agency heads or, you know,
deputy director of this bureau or even the data analysts themselves to surface issues.
Yeah, there's no shortage of, there's no shortage of issues to address or
even brain power or good ideas. A lot of it is there's just limited ability to execute.
So it's the real battle is prioritizing and trying to keep focused on something for long enough.
Right. And I like discovering the problems, probably it doesn't sound like it's a very big
issue for you guys. You have the channels to get at what some of the problems are,
maybe a listening strategy that is built out from the central would help you
see who's complaining about it the most. And that might help from prioritization perspective. But
I mean, like, we don't, we're still trying to figure that out, even in private companies who
have a little bit more control over how we spend our time sometimes. So it's, I mean,
I think it's a relatively new thing that people are trying to talk about and develop strategies
around. I'm sure it'll take you guys some time to get there once you've determined it's a bigger
need than it is right now. Yeah. Yeah. I also think that, like, the, you know, the hundred
thousand foot level, you know, for Baltimore, like, the priority areas, of course, are public
safety and city cleanliness. And so the issue is that, like, solutions to both of those can be
completely based on neighborhood, you know, within the city. It's very hyperlocal, both of those
issues. And so for issues like that, your qualitative information, the voice of the
residents is just as important, if not more important, to make sure you've got a sustainable
solution to address those problems. The data that we have centrally to maybe analyze some of these
situations may or may not tell us something at the, at a very local level. We may have,
so for one data, yeah, we can zoom in on a particular block. But for other issues,
we may not have data at that scale. And so you've got to go listen to the residents.
I have one quick follow-up question, Rachel, if you don't mind.
We have quite a few questions. I just want to make sure I get to a few of those others, too.
Is that? Yeah. Maybe it's a quick one. I'll ask just a quick yes or no format question
about qualitative data collection. I'm like, I, I'm sort of like text analysis is also an interest
of mine that I follow. And I was just curious if you guys are looking into that, if implementation
of deep learning models is something that, like, is a big security conversation for you guys?
You can answer that yes or no, if you like, just to help move on.
Uh, yes. Okay. Yeah, I figured as much. I can say more. And by the way, we haven't
gotten into AI ethics, but AI ethics is something we're, we're going to start
working on here in the city as well. So I'll be with you on the side, maybe to continue chatting
more about Baltimore. And I don't know who the other person was from Baltimore, but maybe they'll
want to loop into. Yeah. Thank you. In the chat too. Cool. Thank you.
Um, well, Justin, I forgot to ask you, do you have a like hard stop at the top of the hour?
Do you have a few minutes to go over? I don't even remember.
I love this conversation. I just, I didn't want to like cut things off.
I'm good. Um, yeah, I don't have a hard stop. I'm good.
Okay. Um, Timothy, I saw you had a great question on getting buy-in and leading to change. Would,
would you want to jump in? Hello? Yeah. Yeah. Thanks.
Thank you for hosting again. And, um, it's a really interesting talk. I'm always trying to
like translate things that people bring into what we're doing at my, um, at my research institute.
And, um, yeah, my question was sort of around, how do you, what are some key lessons that you had?
Um, because you're trying to do, it sounds like a lot of change, a lot of scary change to a lot
of people and resources are limited pretty much everywhere, but you know, specifically in the
public sector and, um, I'm in academic research. So, um, I was wondering how do you, um, there
are some key lessons as to how to navigate, uh, that sort of change leadership part of things.
Yeah. Oh my God. Uh, how long do we have? Um, you have, you have three, you have 300 words.
Um, oh man. Yeah. I, um, one thing I've learned, and I think this was probably a mistake of mine
of mine early on in the CDO role was, um, there's, so when it comes to data governance, right? Like
it's, there's a variety of different issues you could be tackling. There's different approaches.
What, what I had convinced myself of was the need for, let's stand up this broad data governance
committee for the city. Every agency will have a representative. We're going to, we're going to
take one issue area at a time, but everyone is, every agency, every representative needs to make
some progress on that area. So if it's data quality, you know, we created this data quality
guide book or toolkit. And step by step, the idea was that like month after month every day, um,
but make some kind of progress. Um, sorry, did I freeze? Are you guys hearing me? Yeah,
a little bit. I thought it was on my end. I was just, uh, okay. Um,
I, I think that was probably the wrong approach, especially in an environment of such limited
bandwidth. Um, not only from the agency side, but from my own bandwidth, I think, um, I'm having a
lot more success and doubling down on the areas where there is obvious buy-in and people want to
change something. Um, trying to get everyone to move an inch in the same direction was a real
grind. And I'm not convinced that it has the same impact as finding the one or two people who want
to go a couple of miles with you. Um, so that's, I think that's where I'm, I think that's one of
the, been one of my big lessons learned over the last two years. Like, and maybe that's only when
you're so resource constrained as to be an office of one, but, but, um, yeah, that's, I think that's
one of my, my main lessons learned on that front. Um, of course, all of the other typical change
management advice applies, right? Like, um, listening and making sure you're actually solving
someone else's problem and not just your problem or what you perceive as being the problem. Um,
but yeah, I don't know. Does that, does that help? Yeah, definitely. I don't, I definitely want to
leave time for more questions, but I think I'm seeing some repeating themes. One is like,
it seems like feudalism is still alive and well, you know, in the 21st century,
and that's something to navigate, but also, you know, the point that you raised, which is,
if you don't necessarily have the authority to just tell people to do what,
tell people what to do, especially in other agencies, then I think it's, it's, um,
good to find people who are already willing to go with you and then build your success stories and
then say, hey, you know, we did this and, you know, this indicator went up for when, you know,
whatever the good direction was when, you know, we saw massive improvement with this person who was,
you know, willing to go the extra mile or do a little bit of side project and then build that
as a success story for others, I guess. Yeah. Even, even when you are the person that has
the authority to say, yeah, you have to do this. Um, look, I, I report to the city's,
the city administrator, who was, like I said, it's kind of like the chief operating officer.
Um, they early on were, were involved in setting some of the expectations around data governance,
but agencies are under countless, countless unfunded mandates, right? That like
the mayor wants them to do this. These are the things that are legally obligated to do.
They've got citizens wanting them to do, go in this direction. Um, all of whom have a right to
claim that like they have a voice in what that agency is doing. And I'm just one of those voices.
So yeah, like I, I have, you know, I'm, I'm, I report to the city administrator. I'm the chief
data officer that comes with some authority, but you know, that doesn't, that still doesn't mean
the thing's going to get done. Um, and not only that, um, if, if I take the approach of, well,
I'm in the mayor's office, so you have to listen to me, it's going to backfire and people aren't
going to want to work with me. Um, so that card is best kept for as long as possible in your
back pocket. Um, because it just, it just burns bridges so quickly. So, um, yeah, the, the idea
is really no matter what to find a way to, to ensure folks that what they're doing is in their
best interest, um, genuinely, not just like selling them, you know, on something. Yeah.
Yeah. It's, it's definitely tough, but yeah, I appreciate it. Thank you. Yeah.
Thank you so much, Justin. And I know we're at the top of the hour and a bunch of people might
have to drop to other meetings too, but I did want to just ask one more question and I
can't remember who asked it. It was maybe Sep or Alan was asking about, um, like cross city
collaboration between, um, like different data teams. And if there's, I'm not remembering exactly
the question, but if there's a way to connect with other city governments and work together,
and I think I've seen this a lot in the pharma space recently and all these like big pharma
companies working together and creating packages. Curious if there's something that exists in
government. Um, yes. Um, that's, I often tell folks, that's one of the best parts of working
in government is, um, we don't have to worry about, um, protected information or, or competition. Um,
and so there, there are a few different networks, um, a couple that we participate in. So like
Bloomberg Philanthropies, um, is pretty big in like the local government space. So Michael
Bloomberg's kind of theory of change was that if you really want to make impact and impact people's
lives, like local government is the place to be because, you know, at the, at the federal level,
yeah, you've got very wide, broad impact, but it is very hard to see like, you know, this trillion
dollar budget trickle down to see how it impacts someone's lives. Local government is where that
money eventually comes into your programs and projects. And so, um, the Bloomberg network,
you know, there are a couple of different networks that they run. There's the innovation teams. They
all, you know, I mean, within the first couple of months of me joining the I-team, we were, we
were visiting Los Angeles to meet with the other I-teams, um, and specifically with Los Angeles'
I-team because they were working on the same, um, issue as we were going to be working on, which was
police recruiting and hiring. Um, there's, they also run something called the City, um, Data
Alliance, which is a cohort right now of about 20 or 25 cities. We get technical assistance around
a particular track. Um, there's executive leadership training for, for using data.
So that's another network. I'm part of, um, um, it's called the Civic Analytics Network,
which is a network of chief data officers, um, from cities around the country. Um, that's run
out of, uh, Harvard Kennedy School, um, um, by Professor, uh, Stephen Goldsmith. Um, he was a
mayor of Indianapolis. He was a deputy mayor of New York. Um, so yeah, that's, like I said,
that there's tons, and, and through that network, like I've, I'll call up the chief data officer
from Pittsburgh or Boston and, like, ask them if they've, how they're tackling this problem or what
piece of data stack they're using to, to solve different things. So, um, that's, that's one of
the best parts of city government is just being able to, like, cold call people from other sides
of the country and figure out how they solve something. Thank you so much, Justin. I tried
to capture some of those links and share them, but maybe after I can email you for some to share with
the recording too. Sure. Um, because I saw a lot of people are sharing different open, uh, data
portals in their cities too, which I can collect those all together as well. Yeah. Um, I know you
have a two and a half year old who's trying to take a nap pretty soon, so. No, that's the problem.
He's not trying to take a nap. That's the problem. He's trying not to. I might like to go take a nap
right now, but, um, uh, just want to check if anybody's on, had a question you wanted to ask
that we didn't get to yet. I'll give it another opportunity to raise your hand here.
I think a few people that had asked earlier had to drop, but, um, let's see. Double check. Oh,
one hand. There it is. Hi, Barry. Hi, everyone. Um, mine is not a question. Um, this is my first
time of joining. Thanks for joining. Yes. Um, I'm joining from Africa, the Gambia.
So I am very, very much, um, inspired by the speakers. So I look forward to joining next week.
Thank you so much. Awesome. Thank you for joining. Yes. Love to, to see you next week and
have you join in the LinkedIn group too. And if you have any questions, feel free to reach out to me too.
Thank you all so much for joining. Thank you, Justin, for sharing your insights and experience
really, really appreciate it. This has been a great lively discussion for the first one back
of the year. Cool. Thanks for the invite, Rachel. This is great. Thanks for all the questions, everybody.